Feat(Mesh): Multi-zone deployment in Universal mode (#4375)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_how-tos/mesh/deploy-multi-zone-global-control-plane-universal-docker.md

breadcrumbs:
  - /mesh/
related_resources:
  - text: "Multi-zone deployment"
    url: /mesh/multi-zone/
  - text: "{{site.mesh_product_name}} data plane on Universal"
    url: /mesh/data-plane-universal/
  - text: "Zone ingress"
    url: /mesh/zone-ingress/
  - text: "Zone egress"
    url: /mesh/zone-egress/

products:
  - mesh

works_on:
  - on-prem

tags:
  - multi-zone
  - universal-mode
  - docker

min_version:
  mesh: '2.10'

prereqs:
  skip_product: true
  inline:
    - title: Docker
      content: |
        This guide requires [Docker](https://docs.docker.com/get-started/get-docker/) installed on your system.
    - title: jq
      content: |
        This guide requires [jq](https://jqlang.org/download/) installed on your system.

cleanup:
  inline:
    - title: Remove the {{site.mesh_product_name}} containers, network, and temporary directory
      content: |
        ```sh
        docker rm --force \
          kong-mesh-multi-zone-zone1-ingress \
          kong-mesh-multi-zone-zone1-control-plane \
          kong-mesh-multi-zone-global-control-plane \
          kong-mesh-multi-zone-postgres
        docker network rm kong-mesh-multi-zone

>         rm -rf "$KONG_MESH_MULTI_ZONE_TMP"

Reviewer: In a fresh shell this expands to `rm -rf ""` and silently no-ops, leaving the temp dir.

```suggestion
        rm -rf "${KONG_MESH_MULTI_ZONE_TMP:-/tmp/kong-mesh-multi-zone}"
```

> If you are using [Colima](https://colima.run/), make sure to adjust the path in the steps of this guide. Colima only allows shared paths from the `HOME` directory or `/tmp/colima/`. Instead of `/tmp/kong-mesh-multi-zone`, you can use `/tmp/colima/kong-mesh-multi-zone`.

Create the directory if it doesn't exist:

```sh
export KONG_MESH_MULTI_ZONE_TMP="/tmp/kong-mesh-multi-zone"
mkdir -p "$KONG_MESH_MULTI_ZONE_TMP"
```

## Create a Docker network

Set up a separate Docker network for the containers. In this example we'll use IP addresses in the `172.18.78.0/24` range:

```sh
docker network create \
  --subnet 172.18.0.0/16 \
  --ip-range 172.18.78.0/24 \
  --gateway 172.18.78.254 \
  kong-mesh-multi-zone
```

## Start PostgreSQL

The global and zone control planes both need a database to persist state in Universal mode. Run a single PostgreSQL container and create one database per control plane.

1. Run PostgreSQL:

   ```sh
   docker run \
     --detach \
     --name kong-mesh-multi-zone-postgres \
     --hostname postgres \
     --network kong-mesh-multi-zone \
     --ip 172.18.78.10 \
     --env POSTGRES_USER=kong \
     --env POSTGRES_PASSWORD=pass123 \
     postgres:16
   ```

> 
> 1. Create a database for each control plane:
> 
>    ```sh
>    docker exec --interactive kong-mesh-multi-zone-postgres \
>      psql -U kong -d postgres <<'SQL'
>    CREATE DATABASE global;
>    CREATE DATABASE zone1;
>    SQL
>    ```

Reviewer: Races with first-boot `initdb` - `psql` often hits `the database system is starting up`. Wait for readiness first.

````suggestion
   ```sh
   until docker exec kong-mesh-multi-zone-postgres pg_isready -U kong -d postgres >/dev/null 2>&1; do
     sleep 1
   done
   docker exec --interactive kong-mesh-multi-zone-postgres \
     psql -U kong -d postgres <<'SQL'
   CREATE DATABASE global;
   CREATE DATABASE zone1;
   SQL
   ```
````

   ```

1. Run the global control plane:

   ```sh
   docker run \
     --detach \
     --name kong-mesh-multi-zone-global-control-plane \
     --hostname global-control-plane \
     --network kong-mesh-multi-zone \
     --ip 172.18.78.1 \
     --publish 5681:5681 \
     --publish 5685:5685 \
     --env KUMA_MODE=global \
     --env KUMA_ENVIRONMENT=universal \
     --env KUMA_STORE_TYPE=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_HOST=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PORT=5432 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_USER=kong \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PASSWORD=pass123 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_DB_NAME=global \
     kong/kuma-cp:{{site.data.mesh_latest.version}} run
   ```

   The global control plane exposes:

   * Port `5681`: the HTTP API and GUI, available at <http://127.0.0.1:5681/gui>.
   * Port `5685`: the {{site.mesh_product_name}} Discovery Service (KDS) endpoint that zone control planes connect to.

## Configure kumactl

To manage the deployment with [kumactl](/mesh/cli/), connect it to the global control plane.

1. Run the following command to get the admin token from the global control plane:

   ```sh
   export KONG_MESH_MULTI_ZONE_ADMIN_TOKEN="$(

>      docker exec --tty --interactive kong-mesh-multi-zone-global-control-plane \

Reviewer: `--tty` breaks this in non-tty contexts (CI, piped scripts); `wget` doesn't need stdin either.

```suggestion
     docker exec kong-mesh-multi-zone-global-control-plane \
```

     --env KUMA_ENVIRONMENT=universal \
     --env KUMA_STORE_TYPE=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_HOST=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PORT=5432 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_USER=kong \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PASSWORD=pass123 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_DB_NAME=zone1 \
     --env KUMA_MULTIZONE_ZONE_GLOBAL_ADDRESS=grpcs://global-control-plane:5685 \
     --env KUMA_MULTIZONE_ZONE_KDS_TLS_SKIP_VERIFY=true \
     kong/kuma-cp:{{site.data.mesh_latest.version}} run
   ```

   The zone control plane exposes:

   * Port `25681`: the local HTTP API and GUI, available at <http://127.0.0.1:25681/gui>.
   * Port `25678`: the local XDS endpoint that data plane proxies inside the zone connect to.

   `KUMA_MULTIZONE_ZONE_KDS_TLS_SKIP_VERIFY=true` is required because the global control plane's certificate is self-signed in this demo. For production, use a certificate signed by a trusted CA. See [Secure access across services](/mesh/secure-access/) for more information.

1. Confirm the zone registered against the global control plane:

   ```sh
   kumactl get zones
   ```

   You should see `zone1` listed as `Online`.

## Start the zone ingress

> A zone ingress is the entry point for cross-zone traffic. Without it, the global control plane has no way to route requests from other zones into `zone1`.

Reviewer: The global CP distributes config, it doesn't route traffic - the ingress is what makes the zone reachable.

```suggestion
A zone ingress is the entry point for cross-zone traffic. Without it, other zones have no way to reach services in `zone1`.
```

---

This guide walks you through running a multi-zone {{site.mesh_product_name}} deployment in Universal mode using Docker containers. We'll start a PostgreSQL database to back the control planes, deploy a global control plane, register a zone control plane against it, and run a zone ingress so cross-zone traffic can flow.

## Install {{site.mesh_product_name}}

1. Run the following command to install the {{site.mesh_product_name}} binaries:

   ```sh
   curl -L https://developer.konghq.com/mesh/installer.sh | VERSION={{site.data.mesh_latest.version}} sh -
   ```

1. Add the binaries to your system's path:

   ```sh
   export PATH="$(pwd)/kong-mesh-{{site.data.mesh_latest.version}}/bin:$PATH"
   ```

1. Run the following command to confirm that {{site.mesh_product_name}} is installed correctly:

   ```sh
   kumactl version 2>/dev/null
   ```

   You should see the following output:

   ```
   Client: {{site.mesh_product_name}} {{site.data.mesh_latest.version}}
   ```
   {:.no-copy-code}

## Create a temporary directory

> Set up a temporary directory to store the zone token and the `ZoneIngress` resource file. Ensure the path does not end with a trailing `/`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Set up a temporary directory to store the zone token and the `ZoneIngress` resource file. Ensure the path doesn't end with a trailing `/`.
```

1. Run the database migrations for the `global` database:

   ```sh
   docker run --rm \
     --network kong-mesh-multi-zone \
     --env KUMA_STORE_TYPE=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_HOST=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PORT=5432 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_USER=kong \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PASSWORD=pass123 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_DB_NAME=global \
     kong/kuma-cp:{{site.data.mesh_latest.version}} migrate up
   ```

1. Run the global control plane:

   ```sh
   docker run \
     --detach \
     --name kong-mesh-multi-zone-global-control-plane \
     --hostname global-control-plane \
     --network kong-mesh-multi-zone \
     --ip 172.18.78.1 \
     --publish 5681:5681 \
     --publish 5685:5685 \
     --env KUMA_MODE=global \
     --env KUMA_ENVIRONMENT=universal \
     --env KUMA_STORE_TYPE=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_HOST=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PORT=5432 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_USER=kong \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PASSWORD=pass123 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_DB_NAME=global \
     kong/kuma-cp:{{site.data.mesh_latest.version}} run
   ```

   The global control plane exposes:

>    * Port `5681`: the HTTP API and GUI, available at <http://127.0.0.1:5681/gui>.

Reviewer 2: When you navigate to this link, it says the GUI is disabled because this is a CP

>    * Port `5681`: the HTTP API and GUI, available at <http://127.0.0.1:5681/gui>.

Author: ```suggestion
   * Port `5681`: the HTTP API and GUI.
```

     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PORT=5432 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_USER=kong \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PASSWORD=pass123 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_DB_NAME=zone1 \
     kong/kuma-cp:{{site.data.mesh_latest.version}} migrate up
   ```

1. Run the zone control plane:

   ```sh
   docker run \
     --detach \
     --name kong-mesh-multi-zone-zone1-control-plane \
     --hostname zone1-control-plane \
     --network kong-mesh-multi-zone \
     --ip 172.18.78.2 \
     --publish 25681:5681 \
     --publish 25678:5678 \
     --env KUMA_MODE=zone \
     --env KUMA_MULTIZONE_ZONE_NAME=zone1 \
     --env KUMA_ENVIRONMENT=universal \
     --env KUMA_STORE_TYPE=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_HOST=postgres \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PORT=5432 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_USER=kong \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_PASSWORD=pass123 \
     --env KUMA_STORE_POSTGRES_DB_NAME=zone1 \
     --env KUMA_MULTIZONE_ZONE_GLOBAL_ADDRESS=grpcs://global-control-plane:5685 \
     --env KUMA_MULTIZONE_ZONE_KDS_TLS_SKIP_VERIFY=true \
     kong/kuma-cp:{{site.data.mesh_latest.version}} run
   ```

   The zone control plane exposes:

>    * Port `25681`: the local HTTP API and GUI, available at <http://127.0.0.1:25681/gui>.

Author: ```suggestion
   * Port `25681`: the local HTTP API and GUI.
```

1. Run the zone ingress data plane proxy:

   ```sh
   docker run \
     --detach \
     --name kong-mesh-multi-zone-zone1-ingress \
     --hostname zone1-ingress \
     --network kong-mesh-multi-zone \
     --ip 172.18.78.3 \
     --publish 10000:10000 \
     --volume "$KONG_MESH_MULTI_ZONE_TMP:/demo" \
     kong/kuma-dp:{{site.data.mesh_latest.version}} run \
       --proxy-type=ingress \
       --cp-address=https://zone1-control-plane:5678 \
       --dataplane-token-file=/demo/token-zone1 \
       --dataplane-file=/demo/zone1-ingress.yaml
   ```

1. Confirm the zone ingress registered with the zone control plane:

   ```sh
   kumactl get zone-ingresses
   ```

   You should see `zone1-ingress` listed.

## Verify the deployment

1. Confirm the zone is healthy and online:

   ```sh
   kumactl inspect zones
   ```

   You should see `zone1` reporting `Online` with its ingress listed.

1. Open the global control plane UI at <http://127.0.0.1:5681/gui> and check that:

   * `zone1` appears in the **Zones** view.

>    * `zone1-ingress` appears in the zone's **Ingresses** tab.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   * `zone1` displays in the **Zones** view.
   * `zone1-ingress` displays in the zone's **Ingresses** tab.
```
